is your dog biting you when he's
overexcited recently I got a message
from an owner of a dog that suffers from
this kind of overstimulation when she
gets home from work I also had a client
who rescued a dog that had this problem
but in his case it was much much more
severe a lot of dogs get overstimulated
and excited and if left to their own
devices they don't deal with it in a
healthy manner most jump up or run
around but they can be taught to sit or
to lay down when the person comes home
from work but some dogs actually get
aggressive and for some the aggression
is fairly severe not only are they over
stimulated and overexcited I believe
that they almost act as if they have a
neurologic sensory disorder although I
can't prove it because of course they're
dogs and I can't ask them I think it's
like having a child with ADHD or some
autistic tendencies either way these
dogs aren't dealing with excitement in a
normal fashion I often see this in
herding dogs although any dog can suffer
from it I think the herding instinct in
their brain kind of misfires and it gets
their teeth and their jaws involved just
like they would nip its talk when
they're working my former service dog
mr. snitch suffered from a mild form of
this and when we would get home from
work he would rush to the door and
snatch a shoe and he would run from room
to room wagging his tail and growling
and carrying his shoe he was so excited
that he had to have something in his
mouth he never ate or chewed on the shoe
but I think he preferred shoes to toys
because they smelled more like us he
pretty much taught himself his own
coping skills when he was overexcited by
putting something in his mouth now fast
forward a few years my ex-husband and I
were raising another Malinois and when
we would come home and open the door to
his crate he would come out biting and
he would bite us in the leg or the arm
and even draw blood as a puppy he was
extremely aggressive so I had to teach
him the same kind of coping skills that
my previous dog had taught himself it
wasn't that he wanted to hurt us he
really didn't
it was simply that he didn't know how to
deal with his excitement and in some
ways his genetics told him to bite when
he was excited so we placed the toy box
right next to his crate but at first he
still wanted to rush out of his crate
and bite us so then we would let him out
of his crate we would kind of wiggle the
toy in front of him so that he would run
out and latch onto it but I also found
that if I wasn't careful and I let go of
the toy sometimes he would drop the toy
and come back at me
so some tricks that I've learned along
the ways for dogs like this always keep
a toy box near your dog's crate wiggle
the toy to engage him and give him
something to latch on to when he comes
out when he comes out hold it while it's
motionless don't tug on it or continue
to wiggle it and it's still in his mouth
kind of let him decompress motion like
walking towards the door or tugging on
the toy and aggravate this over
sensitivity causing them to growl and
get more excited so stay still for a
moment or two until he seems a little
more composed if he wants to let go of
the toy and come back on to you hold the
toy as you slowly walk him towards the
door to go outside don't engage in a
game of tug as this will continue to
overstimulate him the idea is that he
gets to keep something in his mouth to
bite or suck on to kind of soothe his
nerves for one client the client with
the rescue dog that I mentioned I had
her pack a fanny pack full of toys so if
her dog dropped the first toy and came
back towards her excitedly to bite her
she had something else to put in his
mouth until she could get him outside
these tricks work for most oversensitive
biters and eventually you can teach the
dog to go and get his own toy when he's
overstimulated like this most dogs
decompress after they've been outside
for a few minutes but a few dogs are
severely aggressive and unpredictable
the rescue dog that I worked with was a
adult dog and when he got excited and
bit he was dangerous and to make matters
worse his owner never knew when he would
trigger that behavior he was sometimes
when
other dogs barked or when he would get
excited in his mind when she was playing
with him so his behaviors were much
harder to predict seeking a veterinary
behaviorist or someone who can prescribe
calming drugs may be in order if you
have a dog like this if your dogs biting
you excitedly and unpredictably the
chances are he's not comfortable in his
mind and in his brain he's not happy and
no one wants to feel like they're unsafe
or under siege all the time so the
number one thing to do is to make sure
you're comfortable dealing with a dog
like this and if you need help get it
from a veterinary behaviorist and if you
need more information please go to